national

Kerala: Fake ISRO spy case: The seven characters of the false espionage story

It all began on October 20, 1994, when Maldivian national Mariam Rasheeda was booked under Section 14 of the Foreigner's Act and Section 7 of the Foreigners order for overstaying in India after the expiry of her visa. The arrest of Rasheeda sparked off a chain of events in the next few days and months that resulted in the destruction of the careers of two brilliant ISRO scientists, and the disruption of the personal lives of four others. The fake ISRO spy case that had shaken the science community in India and the political administration in Kerala in the 1990s, finally came to an end on Friday when the Supreme Court granted a compensation of Rs 50 lakh to acquitted scientist Nambi Narayanan for being falsely arrested and tortured by the Kerala Police 24 years back.

Risk Comment: The case not just ruined the careers and reputation of the seven accused but is also believed to have set ISRO back several years, slowing down its efforts and programmes in mastering cryogenic technology that is currently being used in GSLV rockets. In the course of this whole story, national interest has been sacrificed because of someone's thoughtless actions. It is not just a few individuals who have suffered because of these actions. The whole country has suffered.   Referring to the harm caused to the scientist's reputation because of the case, the Supreme Court said that the “reputation of an individual is an in segregable facet of his right to life with dignity”, fundamental to Article 21. It directed Kerala to pay the compensation amount within eight weeks.

New Delhi: RFL money laundering case: Court sends Shivinder Singh to judicial custody.
Former Fortis Healthcare promoter Shivinder Singh, arrested by the Enforcement Directorate in a money laundering case related to alleged misappropriation of funds at Religare Finvest Ltd (RFL),

Risk Comment:  An amount of about Rs 1,000 crore to various persons from entities linked to the corporate loan book and finally, the money was siphoned off. This put RFL in a poor financial condition by disbursing loans to companies with no financial standing and controlled by them. The companies to which the loans were disbursed willfully defaulted in repayments and caused a loss to RFL to the tune of Rs 2,397 crore.


Kochi: Left parties announce 7-day nationwide protests from Jan 1 against CAA, NRC, NPR.

The Left parties on Thursday announced a seven-day nationwide protest from January 1 to 7 and a general strike on January 8 against the Citizenship Amendment Act, the National Population Register and the National Register of Citizens. The Left parties call upon all their units and all the states of the country to organize powerful protest movements against the assault on the Indian Constitution through the CAA/NRC/NPR, the statement said. The protests shall continue peacefully, the Left parties said. Meanwhile in UP Internet connectivity has been snapped in districts including Agra, Bulandshahr, Bijnor, Mathura, Saharanpur, Firozabad, Ghaziabad, Sambhal, Meerut and Sitapur till at least Friday evening.


Risk Comment: Their anger is growing against a controversial new citizenship law, which grants citizenship to religious minorities from three neighboring countries but excludes Muslims. But PM insists the law is not divisive.
New Delhi: Those not filing GST returns may face attachment of property, bank accounts
Those not filing GST returns could face attachment of their properties, including bank accounts, by tax officials. According to the standard operating procedure (SoP) issued by the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC), the GST commissioner may resort to provisional attachment under the section 83 of the Central GST Act.
Risk Comment: The SoP was issued to address the issue of divergent practices being followed by the tax department of the Centre and states in case of non-furnishing of GST returns. Under it, a clarification was issued to ensure uniformity in respect of the appropriate procedure to be followed in case of non-furnishing of returns. SoP clarified that the notice to a defaulter is to be issued in GSTR-3A and no separate notice is required to be issued for best judgment assessment. The circular says that a system-generated message will be sent to registered persons three days before the due date to nudge them to file returns and the notice in GSTR-3A will be issued five days after due date of furnishing returns. However, Under the pre-GST state-level value added regime, cancellation of registration rarely happened. Tax officials used to make the registration dormant in case of non-filing of returns for more than one year. As such, cancellation of registration is too harsh under SoP

North
Chandigarh: Punjab Fares badly in good governance rankings

Punjab has fared badly in the ranking for good governance index (GGI) by finishing 13th out of 18 big states. The neighboring state of Haryana finished seventh in the same category while Himachal Pradesh topped the north-east and hill state category. Cash-strapped Punjab finished last in the economic governance with a score of 0.37. The score for economic governance was given on the basis of growth in per capita gross state domestic product (GSDP), fiscal deficit as a percentage of GSDP.

Risk Comment: Poor show has not come as a surprise as the state is struggling with its finances by having liability — in the form of salary, pension, subsidy and interest on loans — more than its revenue income.

New Delhi: Unusual spell of cold wave grips north India; scientists explain why

An unusual and powerful spell of Western Disturbances, originating in the Mediterranean Sea, has made the Hindi heartland shiver for the past fortnight. Unfortunately, the spell, striking once in four to five decades, will continue to freeze people on New Year's Eve too. It is a long spell, very unique in nature, and would affect entire northwest India.

Risk Comment : The thick cover of smog on the Indo-Gangetic plains and the uneven warming of the Indian Ocean has a role to play in this robust spell of Western Disturbances, extratropical storms originating in the Mediterranean region causing sudden winter rain to the northwestern parts of the Indian subcontinent, which have brought the day temperatures in some Indian cities below 12 degrees Celsius.

Rajasthan: Arrested mining engineer has assets worth over Rs 100 crore

The superintending engineer of the mining and geology department who was arrested by the ACB sleuth for taking a bribe of Rs 1 lakh, turned out to be a millionaire with assets worth over Rs 100 crore owning large plots in posh colonies, farmhouse, agriculture land, sandstone factories, gas stations.

Risk Comment:  Government employees facing criminal or corruption cases are under a scanner of the Modi administration which is in the process of weeding out bad elements from the bureaucracy as part of efforts to ensure high integrity and standards. The Ministry of Home Affairs has dismissed 1,083 lower-level employees from government service during the last five years. The government has the right to take disciplinary action against erring officials as per the applicable disciplinary rules. Home Ministry had initiated the process of removal of employees at lower level based on performance, character and corruption.


Udaipur: Crackdown on sand mafia.

Police have booked around 14 people and seized 37 vehicles including dumper, trucks and tractors for illegal extraction and transportation of sand in Udaipur and surrounding areas. The action followed a crackdown on members of the sand mafia operating in the district by the police

Risk Comment: The ban on sand (bajri) mining has paved way for a new and formidable mafia to spread its wings in the state. Risky though the new trade may be its lure of easy money and high profit has attracted old veterans of illicit liquor trade. There are gangs which take contract of Rs 25,000 to safely deliver an overloaded truck of sand to its destination in Jaipur. They either pay the cops and mining department or find an alternative route.


South
Bengaluru: Miscreants attack CPI office, torch six bikes
Miscreants attacked the Communist Party of India's Karnataka headquarters in Vyalikaval, near Malleswaram, past midnight and torched six motorcycles of workers parked on the premises. The CPI has alleged that right-wing activists were involved in the arson.
Risk Comment: CPI has staged protests against central policies like CAA and NRC, it seems Those offended by it may have burnt the bikes. All the bikes belonged to party workers.

Telangana: In 2019, dollar dreams go bust for Telangana students

The year started on a rough note for Telugu students in the US after the Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) department cracked down on those enrolled with University of Farmington, Michigan – a fake varsity set up by US government to entrap illegals. Beginning January, about 250 Indian students – most from Telangana and AP – were detained and deported in phases, while eight others were arrested for fraudulently facilitating this malpractice from February 2017 to January 2019 and allowing foreign nationals to illegally remain and work in the US. Seven are serving a prison term – of 12 to 24 months – in the US. Hearing for the eighth accused is in January 2020.

Risk Comment: The sting operation by US agencies resulted in a raging debate back home, with many lashing out at US authorities for resorting to entrapment i.e. deliberately setting up a fake varsity to mislead students and making them commit a crime. They also slammed ICE for treating students as criminals, radio-tagging many and restricting their movement. In defense, ICE claimed students enrolled despite knowing that it did not offer a full course of study, as per federal rules. Accusing them of using F-1 scheme (F & M visas are given to non-immigrant students planning to study in the US) as a pay-to stay scheme, they said their detention was valid.


East

Chhattisgarh: 2019 Year ender: Lowest Maoist violence in the last five years

Chhattisgarh witnessed lowest Maoist violence in the last five years in the year 2019 as per the state police data. However, a section of police officers in the state believe that forces in Maoist –hit areas were less aggressive because of parliamentary and municipal elections.

Risk Comment: The police brass attributes the significant decline to a change in strategy. The operations were carried out on the basis of specific intelligence input. 79 Maoists were killed in 2019 till December 19, which is more than 46 encounter killings in 2015 and 77 in 2017. 135 Maoists were killed in 2016, and 124 in 2018. There is a contrary side of these figures for 2019. Chhattisgarh government and police were less aggressive on the ground due to elections. Secondly, the Maoists have expanded their area and developed new divisions in the state, which means their operations are continuing on the ground. The other reason for less violence could also be attributed to less recruitment from the ground.

Dispur: NIA raids Guwahati residence of activist Akhil Gogoi arrested for sedition

Sleuths of the National Investigation Agency (NIA) along with Assam Police on Thursday conducted raids at the Guwahati residence of arrested peasant leader and RTI activist Akhil Gogoi. Teams of NIA officials reached Gogoi's residence at Nizarapar locality and the Gandhi Basti office of Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti (KMSS), the organization Gogoi is associated with for the searches. The personnel took away several files, some containing details of issues he was working on, an old laptop, his hand-written diary of the time spent in jail earlier,
Risk Comment : The peasant leader, who was leading anti-Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) protests in the state, was detained by local police at Jorhat on December 12. The charges pertain to criminal conspiracy, sedition, promoting enmity between groups on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language etc., assertions against national integrity, support to terrorist organization .Several organizations in Assam have called for a 12-hour statewide strike on December 27 beginning 5 am demanding Gogoi's immediate release.


West

Gujarat: IT department files plaint against businessman for holding two PAN cards
A Porbandar-based businessman was booked by Udyognagar police station in Porbandar district after an FIR was filed by the state income tax (I-T) department against him for holding two PAN cards. Lakhman Odedra, according to I-T department officials, was holding two PAN cards in the names of ‘Dahyabhai Arshi Chagan' and ‘Lakhman Arshi Odedra.' Investigators said that Odedra, who holds a British passport, was using one PAN for his business transactions and another for personal transactions including sale and purchase of land.

Risk Comment:  PAN is a unique identity tendered by Income Tax department to resident persons for ascertaining their identity for tax purposes. Ideally, for any person/non-person, Income Tax dept issues a single PAN which is issued in a card form, just like an ATM card or a plastic card. Now about legality of the same, one person/non-person is supposed to hold one PAN only. If due to any reason the card is lost damaged or tempered otherwise, same PAN can be obtained with a new card from the dept. Holding two different PAN, by the same entity, by forging the details or by any other means is ILLEGAL, as per existing laws.

Mumbai: As stress piles on, Indian lenders are on their way to large write-offs

Indian banks have been facing a tough time getting back their monies from recalcitrant borrowers for long now. But their biggest hurdle in getting back dues is time. As time stretched, bad loans have only got worse and banks have had to keep increasing their provisions at the cost of profits. Labelling an errant borrower as bad is only the first step by a bank. The real challenge begins when the borrower is either unable or unwilling to clear dues for a long period.

Risk Comment:  A loan is non-performing if dues are unpaid for 90 days or more. A non-performing loan may bounce back to being standard if the borrower restarts regular payments, or it could slip further to being substandard and doubtful to finally a loss asset. Loss assets are invariably written off. Doubtful assets are those that have been bad for more than a year. The enabling conditions for a bad loan to become standard are absent. The economy is in a protracted slowdown and several stressed sectors are yet to emerge out of their problems. Even as fresh stress has been piling onto bank balance sheets, past pain is only getting intense and this does not augur well for future recoveries.

International

USA: Every step you take, someone is tracking you

The New York Times got access to a file containing location data for millions of Americans. The file did not come from the government, telecom companies or tech giants. It came from a “location data company". These are firms that collect the location data of users and sell it to marketers for targeted ads. The best-known example of a location data firm is Foursquare.

Risk Comment: What is location tracking? Your smartphone is a virtual map of your whereabouts every minute. The phone connects to nearby cellular towers and WiFi, which have a fixed position on the map. This, in turn, can be used to determine the location of the phone itself. As every smartphone has a unique international mobile equipment identity number and the SIM card inside has its unique international mobile subscriber identity, the phone can easily be tagged to the person who owns it. As a result, your smartphone preserves a history of every location you have travelled to, as long as it was on your person. The government can ask telcos and companies to share a user's location if there are suspicious circumstances.

Kazakhstan: Plane With 100 On board Crashes Near Kazakhstan Airport
 A plane with 95 passengers and five crew members on board crashed near the city of Almaty in Kazakhstan on Friday, killing at least seven people, aviation authorities in the Central Asian nation said. The plane was heading for the capital, Nur-Sultan, and "lost altitude during takeoff and broke through a concrete fence" before hitting a small building.

Risk Comment: Aircraft never crash because of one single issue. It's almost always a combination of factors that lead to an accident and therefore it's very difficult to provide accurate statistics as to what the cause of an aircraft crash is. Therefore, the statistics for the causes of aircraft crashes are not always clear. It is however widely accepted that the following statistics are a reasonable representation 55% Pilot Error,17% Aircraft Mechanical Error,13% Weather, 8% Sabotage ,7% Other (ATC, Ground Handling, Unknown)





